From Machine Age to Systems Age: A Lecture by Russell L. Ackoff


Information, Knowledge, and Understanding
There's an old educational adage that says an ounce of knowledge is worth a pound of
information, and an ounce of understanding is worth a pound of knowledge. Unfortunately, the
educational system allocates about 90% of its time to conveying information, about 9% to
conveying knowledge, and about 1% to conveying understanding. The explanation is simple
enough — it's difficult for a teacher to convey what he doesn't have.
Despite the overwhelming importance of understanding, we don't even understand what
understanding is — and we didn't until a short while ago. We tend to use "understanding" and
"knowledge" interchangeably, and they're very different things.
Information is what is contained in descriptions — answers to questions that begin with words
like who, when, where, what, how many. If somebody asks how many people are in this
auditorium and you say 114, that's information.
Knowledge is contained in instruction — answers to questions that begin with how to. If I ask
where Washington is and you say it's 30 miles to the north, that's information. If I say "how do I
get there?" and you instruct me, you're conveying knowledge.
Understanding is conveyed through explanation — answers to questions that begin with why.
As I've indicated, we've only begun to understand something about understanding in recent
years, because all of our understanding is rooted in certain very fundamental assumptions we
make about the nature of the world and the reality we experience.



Worldviews and Cultural Ages
There is a set of fundamental beliefs that each of us holds which constitutes what's called our
worldview — or what the Germans call a Weltanschauung — a concept of the nature of reality.
Everything that we see, let alone think, is coloured by that set of fundamental assumptions.
That worldview has a significance we've only recently begun to appreciate. It has two major
impacts on the way we organise our experience.
First: the fact that you and I share a common view of the world is what makes us members of the
same culture. A culture is a group of people bound together by a common view of the nature of
the world. That view is usually inculcated through education, and we obtain it unconsciously.
Very few people can articulate the worldview that binds their culture together — we have to dig
into our unconscious to extract it.
The significance is this: when the view that binds a culture together begins to go through a
change, society goes through a major transformation. It moves from what the historian calls one
age into another. An age is a period of time in which a culture has a single view of the world.
When that view goes through a transformation, the culture moves from one age into another.
The thesis I want to make and defend here this afternoon is that, starting about the time of World
War II, the Western world began to go through a change of age — a fundamental and profound
transformation in our concept of the nature of reality. If we understand this, it enables us to
understand the incredible rate of change we're experiencing, the fundamental changes in our
institutions, the changes in our morality, and all the rest of it — because it all derives from a
changing view of the world.



The Medieval Period and the Renaissance
A period of transformation from one age to another is something we all know, at least from our
education. The one most familiar to us is the Renaissance — a period of transformation from the
so-called Dark or Middle Ages into the modern era, which for reasons I'll make clear, I will call
the Machine Age.
There are aspects of medieval life that seem to have been lost in history. For example: the
expected lifespan during the medieval period was 27 years. 40% of children born in medieval
times never survived childhood. Over 95% of people lived in abject poverty — at a level we can't
even begin to imagine. Over 95% of people born in that period never travelled more than four
miles from their place of birth during their entire lives. They lived in small villages, never had
exposure to any culture other than the one in which they were born and raised. Life was
miserable.
Therefore the most common and widespread question of the era was: What is the purpose of life?
What reason can there be behind this short period of abject misery?
The major institution of the day — the Church — provided an answer. They said life is
preparatory for death. If you've lived your life right, you have an infinite sojourn in paradise. So
why worry about a lousy 27 years? Focus on eternity.
And that's what the Middle Ages did. They were preoccupied with death, not life. Portions of the
Church declared curiosity a sin. Man contemplated his soul and the spiritual life, not the
objective life he lived every day or the environment in which he lived it.
If you look at the art of the medieval period — literature like Dante's Inferno, Milton's Paradise
Lost — it all had to do with the afterlife. The graphic art of the cathedrals depicted angels and
gods, very little of the everyday events of normal people. The music of the period supported
religious rituals, all dealing with spirituality.
That orientation began to break down as a result of the Crusades. When Peter the Hermit led the
first Crusade across the face of Europe, for the first time hordes of men and women were exposed
to cultures other than their own. They became curious about these differences and the roots of
them. Out of that curiosity about differences in the way men lived grew the movement we know
as the New Humanism, which gave rise to what later came to be known as the Renaissance.
You know what "Renaissance" literally means? Rebirth. It was the re-entry of man into the world
that he experiences — out of spirituality into reality. With the growth of interest in the nature of
man, there was a natural growth of interest in the nature of the environment in which he lived.
And so science as we know it today was born in the latter part of the Renaissance.



The Machine Age: Two Foundational Beliefs
Out of this orientation grew a new view of the world which has pertained from the Renaissance
all the way up through today — because an age doesn't end at a given date. Like old generals, it
tends to fade away as something else comes into the limelight.
Let me characterise the age out of which we're departing. I'm not going to tell you anything you
don't know. I'm going to try to raise it to consciousness and give it a structure so that you
recognise it in a systematic way.
There were two fundamental beliefs at the foundation of the Western worldview for 400 years.

The Complete Understandability of the Universe
The first was a conviction that the universe could be completely understood — that man had the
power, through his mind, to understand everything. That sounds a little arrogant today, perhaps.
But as recently as about 1850, at a major international conference, the leading scientists of the
world issued a proclamation — a statement of shared belief — that by the year 1900, our
understanding of the universe would be complete.
It's perhaps reassuring to know that scientists can't forecast any better than economists can.
They were completely wrong. They didn't anticipate any of the major changes to come, including
Einstein and Heisenberg. But the important thing is: they believed it was possible.

Analysis as the Method of Inquiry
The second critical element was the way we went about inquiring into nature and the nature of
man. We developed a method of inquiry which became pervasive in the Western world.
This method comes naturally to us. If you observe any child in the process of learning, you will
observe it. Give a child an object he's never seen before — a radio, a clock, a toy — and the first
thing he'll do if he wants to understand it is take it apart.
We began inquiry by taking apart whatever it is that we want to understand. The second step was
to try to understand the behaviour of the parts taken separately. And then, once we understand
the behaviour of each of the parts, to aggregate that understanding into an understanding of the
whole.
Three-step process:
  1. Take the thing you want to understand apart
  2. Try to understand the behaviour of its parts
  3. Aggregate the understanding of the parts into an understanding of the whole
That process is called analysis. Analysis became the dominant mode of thought in the Western
world, and still is. It so dominates that if one person says "I had a problem and analysed it" and
another says "I had a problem and thought about it," you'd be hard-pressed to tell me the
difference. We use them synonymously. We didn't even entertain the possibility of there being
another way of thinking.



The Doctrines of the Machine Age
Applying analysis to a world we believed was completely understandable led to a series of
questions, the answers to which formed doctrines. Those doctrines combined to produce our
view of the world.

Reductionism
Suppose we take a familiar object like an automobile and want to understand it. We take it apart.
We get a carburettor. To understand the carburettor, we take it apart. Now we've got a valve. To
understand the valve, we take it apart.
First fundamental question: is there any end to the process of taking things apart?
If you believe the universe is capable of being completely understood, the answer must be yes.
There has to be an end. Therefore the first fundamental doctrine — reductionism — says that
everything in the universe, and every experience of anything in the universe, is reducible to
indivisible parts or elements.
You all recognise this in specific manifestations. In school you learned that every physical object,
if taken apart sufficiently, will ultimately reach an individual particle of matter called the atom.
The atomic theory is a reductionist theory of nature. In chemistry, the periodic table lists the
chemical elements — the ultimate forms of matter from which all others are derived. In biology,
every living thing ultimately reduces to a single element of life called the cell. Even in linguistics,
they ultimately identified an element of sound out of which all languages are built, called the
phoneme.

Cause and Effect
Once we've reduced an automobile to its atoms and understand their behaviour, we have to
aggregate that understanding — which means knowing how the parts relate to each other. In an
era that believed everything reduces to indivisible parts, we also believed that every relationship
in the universe reduces to one simple relationship: cause and effect.
A cause is something which is both necessary and sufficient for its effect. If I strike this lantern
with this pen, you hear a noise. If I hadn't struck it, you wouldn't have heard that noise — the
cause is necessary for the effect. If I do strike it, it makes a noise — the cause is sufficient for the
effect.
Three Consequences of Causal Thinking
Our commitment to cause and effect led to three fundamental beliefs about the nature of the
world.
First: God as Creator. If I have something I don't understand, I look for its cause. But now I have
an unexplained cause. I treat it as an effect and look for its cause. If I trace any causal chain back
— is there any end? If the universe is completely understandable, there must be a first cause. We
gave that cause a name: God. Our concept of God as the Creator derived directly from our
commitment to cause and effect. God is external to the universe but responsible for it. This
notion of God as creator is characteristic of the Western world but not much of the rest of the
world — because most of the rest of the world never made the same commitment to cause and
effect.
Second: Environment-Free Explanation. Because a cause is sufficient for its effect, it provides a
complete explanation. The environment isn't required. Consider the most familiar law of physics
— the law of freely falling bodies: s = ½gt². Why is it called the law of freely falling bodies?
Because it describes a body falling in a vacuum — the absence of an environment. Every
fundamental law of physics describes behaviour in the absence of an environment. What do you
call the place a scientist does research? A laboratory. And what is a laboratory? A place
deliberately constructed to exclude the environment — to study the effect of one variable on
another without environmental intervention.
Third: Determinism. Does every event that occurs have a cause? If the universe is completely
understandable, yes. Nothing happens by chance. Chance is a synonym for ignorance — it
simply means we don't know enough to explain something, but everything is explainable. The
doctrine that everything in the universe occurs as the effect of a cause is called determinism. It
gave rise to an apparent conflict with our belief in free will — which became the principal topic of
Western philosophy for 400 years.

Newton's Machine
Newton was the first to pick up all these elements, put them together, and look at them self-
consciously as the elements of a worldview. A world in which everything is reducible to
indivisible parts, those parts behave according to causal laws, and they do nothing that is not
caused.
Newton told us what kind of world this was. He said the world is a machine. He did not say it was
like a machine — he said it is a machine. Furthermore, he said the universe is a hermetically
sealed clock. It's self-contained, without an environment. It is a closed system.



The Machine Age and Religion
Certain derivative beliefs followed. Every religion in the Western world, regardless of sectarian
differences, preached that the world is a machine created by God to do God's work — and
therefore we are here to serve His purposes, to do His will.
Combine that with an even older belief from Genesis: that man was created in the image of God.
If the universe is a machine created by God to do God's work, and man was created in the image
of God, then what should man be doing?
Creating machines to do his work.
That was the origin of the Industrial Revolution — man's effort to imitate God as he understood
Him at the time.



The Industrial Revolution and Work
The first Industrial Revolution was about the mechanisation of work. Two fundamental
concepts: work and a machine.
It took a major social revolution called the Reformation to tell us what work was, but one thing
was clear: work was real. And reality reduces to atoms, which have only two properties — mass
and energy. Therefore work was defined as the application of energy to matter, in order to change
its properties. If you apply heat to coal and convert it into a gas, that's work. If you move a chair,
that's work — you've changed the location of matter.
A machine is any object which can be used to apply energy to matter so as to transform it.
Somewhere in your schooling you learned that all machines reduce to three elementary
machines — the wheel and axle, the lever arm, and the inclined plane. Every machine is believed
to be some combination of those elements. Reductionism again.

Frederick Taylor and the Factory
How do we mechanise work? Frederick Taylor wrote the bible. You take a task to be done and
analyse it — Taylor called it work analysis. You disaggregate the job into work elements. A work
element is a task so simple it can only be done by one person at a time. For example, tightening a
screw. Ever have two people try to tighten the same screw at the same time?
Through work analysis, we divided work into elementary tasks. The simpler the task, the easier it
would be to mechanise. We mechanised all we possibly could, but some tasks couldn't be
mechanised — either we lacked the technology, or it was more expensive than human labour. So
for those tasks, we put people in.
Now aggregate. What do you get when you take work divided into simple elements, each
performed either by a machine or a person, and aggregate them into a sequence with a final
product?
The modern factory. The production line. The assembly line. Its composition and structure are a
direct consequence of applying the analytical method to a Machine Age concept of work.



The Dilemmas That Broke the Machine Age
Now — what makes one age die and another get born? The answer lies in a concept called the
dilemma. A dilemma is a problem which cannot be solved within the prevailing view of the
world, and therefore constitutes a challenge to that view.
Starting way back, dilemmas began to appear. They didn't carry much force until they gathered
in number and momentum.

Free Will vs. Determinism
The first dilemma: how do you explain freedom of choice in a universe where every choice is
determined by some cause? Philosophers struggled with this for about 300 years. The consensus
they eventually reached was that free will is an illusion granted to us by a merciful God who
realises how dull our life would be without it.
One philosopher expressed it beautifully: "Man is like a fly riding on the trunk of an elephant
who thinks he's steering it. The elephant doesn't mind, and it makes the ride more interesting."
That didn't get rid of the dilemma, because no argument convinces most people they don't have
freedom of will. But most people also believe the world is a machine — and a machine cannot
have parts that have choice.

Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle (1923)
The first dilemma that truly rocked the Machine Age worldview appeared in 1923, when Werner
Heisenberg came out with the Uncertainty Principle. Heisenberg showed that if you take the two
properties of an atom — mass and momentum — and try to determine both at the same moment
of time, the more accurately you determine either one, the less accurately you can determine the
other.
This knocked out the belief that the universe can be completely understood. In the limit, you can
only understand 50% of it at any given moment.
The greatest American philosopher of the time, John Dewey, immediately responded by writing
The Quest for Certainty, in which he said complete understandability of the universe is not
attainable — it is an ideal which we can continually approach but never in principle attain. That
was the first publicly recognised change in the fundamental belief of the era.

Wiener's Cybernetics (1947)
In 1947, a book appeared which rocked the academic world: Cybernetics by the MIT
mathematician Norbert Wiener. Wiener and his colleagues were taken by the new mechanisms
created during the war — servo mechanisms, automatic pilots, guidance systems for missiles.
They tried to develop a theory to explain their behaviour.
Their startling conclusion: whereas for 400 years we had tried to understand man by treating
him as nothing but a complicated machine, now we had a complicated machine which could only
be understood if we looked at it as though it were a man. They called it a teleological mechanism
— "teleological" meaning purposeful, from the Greek.
But you can't be purposeful without choice, and you can't be a mechanism if you've got choice.
How can you have a teleological mechanism? Again, the current worldview simply wasn't
holding up.

Von Bertalanffy's General Systems Theory (1954)
The final attack came in 1954 with a book by the German biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy called
General Systems Theory. The content of the book was relatively unimportant, but the central
organising concept — the system — became the key to understanding what was happening to
our worldview.



What Is a System?
A system is a set of two or more elements that has three properties.
First: Each element in the set can affect the behaviour of the whole. Consider the most familiar
system: yourself. You are a biological system called an organism. You have parts — heart, lungs,
stomach, pancreas — and each can affect your behaviour.
Someone might object: "What about the appendix?" Right — the appendix, as far as we know, has
no effect on anything. The word "appendix" means added on or attached to. It is not a part of the
system precisely because it doesn't affect the whole.
Second: The way each element affects the whole depends on at least one other element. The
effect the heart has on your behaviour depends on what the lungs are doing. If the brain stops
functioning, it affects the pancreas, the liver, and almost everything else. The parts are
interconnected — no part has an independent effect on the whole.
Third: Take the elements of a system, line them up in any order, subdivide them into groups any
way you like — every group will have the first and second properties. Every group can affect the
behaviour of the whole, and no group has an independent effect.
We can summarise: a system is a whole that cannot be divided into independent parts.



The Essential Properties of Systems
Two fundamental characteristics derive from the nature of a system.

Essential properties belong to the whole, not the parts
What's the essential property of an automobile? It can carry you from one place to another. What
part of an automobile can carry you from one place to another? None. Not even the motor — the
motor can't even carry itself.
What are your essential properties as a human being? You live — but no part of you does. You can
read and write — no part of you can. Your hand can't write; that's easy to demonstrate by
removing it from your arm, putting it on a table, and watching it. It won't do anything. Your eye
can't see. Your brain can't think. You can think.
When a system is disassembled, it loses all of its essential properties. Even though you have
every single part, you no longer have an automobile. An automobile is not the sum of its parts.
The behaviour of a system is never equal to the sum of the behaviour of its parts — it is the
product of their interactions.

Parts lose their essential properties when removed
Consider the hand. Its essential properties — holding, pointing, moving — are lost when it's
removed from the body. The eye is an instrument for seeing, but it doesn't see when removed
from the head. The brain doesn't think when removed from the head.



Analysis Cannot Yield Understanding of a System
Here is the dilemma that broke the back of Machine Age thinking.
We have a system. We want to understand it. Analysis is the only way of thinking we know. So
let's analyse it.
Step one of analysis: take it apart. What happens when you take a system apart? It loses all of its
essential properties.
Step two: try to understand each part taken separately. What happens to a part of a system when
you separate it? It loses all of its essential properties.
In 1954, the great insight was: analysis cannot yield understanding of a system. It yields
something — but not understanding. It yields knowledge.
We needed a new way of thinking.



Synthetic Thinking (Systems Thinking)
The new way of thinking — not surprisingly called synthetic or systems thinking — is
diametrically the opposite of analytical thinking. It does not replace analysis; it supplements it.
We still must analyse systems if we want to know them, but analysis won't allow us to understand
them.
Consider: the British automobile has a steering wheel on the right, ours on the left. I'll give you
any number of American and British automobiles. Take them apart from now to doomsday, but
you'll never be able to tell me why the steering wheel is on different sides. The original
automobile was a six-passenger vehicle; today they're getting closer to four. Analyse old and new
automobiles until doomsday — you'll never find the answer to that why question.
The British have their steering wheel on the right because knights were right-handed. They
could defend their right side with a sword, but their left side was exposed, so the inferior rode on
their left to protect them. The driver is the knight; the passenger is the inferior. The United States
never had knights in shining armour — we got about it for different reasons.
The car was originally built for six because it was designed for the average American family,
which was 5.6. It's getting smaller because the average family is now 3.2.
Explanations never lie inside a system. They lie outside.

The Three Steps of Synthesis
Analysis has three steps. Synthesis is the opposite:

 Step   Analysis                                        Synthesis

 1      Take the thing apart                            Identify a containing whole — a larger system of
                                                        which it is a part

 2      Explain the behaviour of each part separately   Explain the behaviour of the containing whole

 3      Aggregate understanding of parts into           Disaggregate understanding of the whole into
        understanding of the whole                      understanding of the part



To explain a university, you don't take it apart into colleges, departments, faculty, students, and
subject matter. You identify the educational system it belongs to, explain that, and then identify
the university's role or function within it.
Analysis reveals structure — it tells us how something works. We abbreviate that as know-how,
or knowledge. Synthesis yields understanding. They are two aspects of our quest for mastery
over our environment, and they are not separate.



The New Doctrines
Expansionism Replaces Reductionism
In analysis, we take things apart into smaller and smaller pieces. In synthetic thinking, we
expand outward. To understand the university, we must understand the educational system. To
understand the educational system, we must understand the society it's part of. To understand
society, we must understand the world.
This doctrine is called expansionism. It raises what appears to be exactly the same question in
reverse: is there any end to the process of expanding the containing system? Is there one whole
which ultimately contains everything?
The answer: once you've given up the belief that the universe can be completely understood, this
question has no meaning in science. If there were one whole that contained everything, you
could never demonstrate it — because to know it would be to understand the universe, which
we've established is in principle not fully understandable. If you believe there is no containing
whole, you could never prove that either. It's an unprovable proposition.
But psychologically, humans feel a tremendous need for some containing whole. This manifested
itself in an interesting way around 1968, during the student revolution. I visited the University of
California at Berkeley and learned that the heaviest-selling book at their bookstore — the largest
university bookstore in the country — was the I Ching.
Why had Buddhist literature suddenly become dominant among university students? The first
generation born after World War II had reached university. They were absorbing by osmosis
some of the systemic transformation taking place. The concept of God the Creator didn't match
— because we'd had to give up cause and effect. They were looking for a whole that gave life
meaning.
They found it in Eastern religions. That is a very different God. Not God the Father. Not God the
Mother. Not God in it. God everything — a God that can't be pictured. Not God the creator, but a
whole of which you are a part. And meditation is the method by which you become conscious of
your membership in that whole.

Producer-Product Replaces Cause and Effect
In 1896, a young man graduated from Harvard — took his undergraduate degree in civil
engineering, his master's in psychology, and his doctorate in philosophy. Edgar Arthur Singer
went to the University of Pennsylvania and two years later wrote what was probably the most
important article in science in the last hundred years. Practically nobody read it.
Singer said science had been cheating for 200 to 300 years. Consider an acorn and an oak tree. Is
the acorn the cause of the oak? No. An acorn is necessary for an oak — you can't get one without
the other. But it's not sufficient. Throw an acorn in the ocean: no oak tree. Plant it in arctic ice: no
oak tree. In the desert: no oak tree.
Science was aware of this, but called it "probabilistic causality" or "non-deterministic causality."
Singer said that was cheating. If a cause is by definition sufficient for its effect, then the
probability of the effect given the cause must be one — nothing else. If the probability is
anything other than one, it's not causality. There is no such thing as probabilistic causality. If it's
probabilistic, it's not causality. If it's causality, it's not probabilistic.
"Non-deterministic causality" violates the most fundamental law of logic, formulated as early as
Aristotle: if you deny the consequence, you must deny the premise.
Singer said this is a fundamentally different relationship — not a kind of cause and effect at all.
He called it producer-product. The acorn is not the cause of the oak; it is a producer of it.

The Orange Metaphor
Imagine a visitor from a foreign country who has never seen an orange. You cut it in half one way
and show them a cross-section. Your partner says, "Why did you cut it that way? Why not the
other way?" At first it seems to make no difference — but if you slice it the other way, you get an
entirely different view of the same orange.
Singer showed that we had assumed the universe is an orange that can only be sliced one way —
cause and effect. He said it's multi-dimensional. There are an infinite number of relationships we
can use to slice the universe, and each gives a different view. The more views we have, the more
likely we are to understand its structure — just as we better understand an orange from seeing
both cross-sections.

The Environment Re-enters
When you look at the oak tree through producer-product, you need the environment to explain
it. The acorn isn't sufficient — you also need moisture, temperature, soil nutrients, and countless
other conditions. The set of all necessary conditions other than the producer is called the
environment.
Through cause and effect, we didn't need the environment to explain anything. Through
producer-product, we need it to explain everything. Exactly the opposite.
The universality of the laws of physics, contrary to popular belief, does not derive from the fact
that they apply to every environment — it derives from the fact that they don't apply to any. They
apply in the absence of an environment. The moment we make laws apply in an environment,
universality disappears.
I remember the terrible shock when something I'd believed so strongly — "everything that goes
up must come down" — turned out to be wrong. Today we put things up that don't come down.
What we know now is: there is no law for which there doesn't exist some environment in which it
does not hold. All explanation is environmentally relative.

Choice Becomes Observable
Perhaps Singer's greatest accomplishment was to demonstrate in detail how choice and free will
can be incorporated into a view of the universe seen through producer-product. Choice becomes
an objectively observable property of behaviour — not something subjectively hidden in the
dark recesses of the mind. He created tests for determining whether you display choice, purpose,
or free will.
This gave rise to the type of psychology subsequently known as behaviourism.



Three Kinds of Systems
When we look at the world not as a machine but as a system, we need to ask: what kind of
system?
There are three kinds.

1. The Machine
A machine has no purpose of its own. It's an instrument used by something external to serve that
thing's purposes. When the universe was a machine, we needed God to give it a function. An
automobile has no purposes of its own — it serves the purposes of its driver. Its parts have no
purpose either. The ideal machine is hermetically sealed, operating independently of its
environment.
2. The Organism
An organism has a purpose of its own, but its parts don't. Your dominant purpose as an organism
is survival (and growth, which is essential for survival). But your organs and cells have no
purpose of their own — they have functions. The environment is a passive supplier of resources
and a receptacle for waste.
Every machine is embedded in an organism, because a machine is simply a system used by one
or more organisms.

3. The Social System
A social system has purposes of its own, its parts have purposes of their own, and it's part of a
larger system which has purposes of its own. The view that emerges is of the universe as a
purposeful system consisting of nested systems, each with its own purposes — with the
possibility of incompatible purposes at any level.
Today we reconceptualise management as the balancing of the interests of the organisation
managed, the interests of its parts (because they have their own purposes), and the interests of
the larger system of which the organisation is a part.



The Implications for Management
The Performance of the Whole
Our characteristic way of running any organisation — military, governmental, corporate — is
divide and conquer. Want to learn how to run a business? Go to business school. Select courses:
finance, accounting, production. We've taken business apart. You study each part separately. The
fundamental assumption is that when you can make each part work effectively, you can make
the whole work effectively.
Wrong. Absolutely wrong.
A system in which each part is working as efficiently as possible is a system which as a whole
cannot be working as efficiently as possible. We can prove that rigorously. But we manage as
though it were not the case.
Suppose we bought one of every make of automobile available in the United States — 142 of
them. We hire 100 of the best automotive engineers and ask: which car has the best carburettor?
Mercedes. Best transmission? Buick. Best distributor? And so on, through every part, until we've
found the best one available.
Then we give the list to the engineers and say: assemble the best possible automobile.
What happens? We don't even get an automobile. The parts don't fit.
The performance of a system is the product of the interactions of its parts. It's the fitting that
matters. But management still focuses on managing the actions of parts rather than their
interactions.
Managing Interactions, Not Actions
For 400 years, we've thought of a manager as the pinnacle of an organisation, telling people
below him what to do — management as supervision or command. That's nonsense today.
When this doctrine was developed, the average worker had three years of education. The tasks
required virtually no skills. Workers were easily substituted.
Today the average employee has more than 12 years of education. They have skills their bosses
don't. I've got programmers who can program circles around me — it would be nonsense for me
to tell them how to write a program. My job isn't to tell them what to do. My job is to create an
environment in which they can do what they know how to do as effectively as possible.
Management is not about managing down. It's about managing over and up — managing the
interactions of your unit with other units across and above, so as to enable those below you to do
their jobs as efficiently as possible.
If someone doesn't know how to do their job, the answer isn't to tell them — it's that you've got
the wrong person in the job.



The Corporation Through Three Lenses
The Corporation as Machine (19th Century)
When we looked at organisations as machines, they had no purpose of their own. They served
the purpose of their god — the owner. In the 19th century, the owner had all the power of God in
his company. He could employ whomever he wanted, under whatever conditions, at whatever
compensation. He could work people 66 hours a week, seven days a week, 52 weeks a year.
The purpose of the corporation was to serve the interest of the owner. And the owner's interest
was profit. Milton Friedman is the great high priest of this view: "The only legitimate objective of
business is business" — meaning profit, and nothing else.

The Corporation as Organism (Post-WWI)
About the time of World War I, the American economy was growing so fast that corporations
could grow faster than they could finance through reinvested profits alone. The fundamental
problem: do I retain control and restrain growth, or give up control and allow growth?
They went public. Equity financing. God disappeared — became an abstract spirit. 250,000
stockholders. You can't sit down and worship them.
As Peter Drucker explained, we created a church and a clergy. The clergy was called
management. It represents the will of the owners to the layman. How does it know the will of the
owners? By revelation — no more direct access than the clergy has to God.
The whole language changed. The chief executive became "the head" of the organisation — a
biological concept. Machines don't have heads; organisms do. The company became a
"corporation" — from corpus, a body. Legally, the corporation became a biological individual,
with the same status as a person in a court of law.
And what happened to profit? Drucker has an absolutely magnificent passage: "Profit is to a
corporation what oxygen is to a human being — necessary for its survival, but not the reason for
it." Profit became a means, not an end. The end was survival and growth. The Fortune 500
emerged. Every company sought to be the biggest, the fastest growing.

The Corporation as Social System (Post-WWII)
About the time of World War II, the organism concept began to break down. We'd always known
that the behaviour of a system containing people depends on the behaviour of those people. But
believe it or not, we didn't know until after World War II that the behaviour of the people depends
on what the system does to them.
That's a feedback loop. How did we find out? The constituent members of organisations began to
organise and protest:
     Workers unionised — the phenomenon of alienation from work
     Minorities organised against mistreatment by the majority
     Women protested sex discrimination
     The young protested age discrimination — the "generation gap"

All of these are structurally identical: a subset of an organisation's members protesting the way
the organisation affects their interests.
Simultaneously, individuals and groups outside the organisation began to protest too. The
consumerist movement, initiated by Ralph Nader. The ecological and environmentalist
movement.
Management had to begin taking into account the interests of the larger system and the smaller
systems, as well as the system it managed.



Development vs. Growth
When we see organisations as social systems, profitability is not an appropriate objective.
Neither are survival and growth. What is?
Development.
Development and growth are entirely different things. A cemetery grows but it doesn't develop.
A rubbish heap grows; it does not develop. Einstein was developing even when he was
contracting in size.
Growth is an increase in size or number. But what is development?
The Leyte Story
Let me share an experience from the army that taught me what development is.
I participated in the invasion of Leyte in World War II. About three months into the campaign, on
the western coast, I was called back to headquarters. General Gruber wanted to see me. I could
only think of one explanation — I was going to be court-martialled again.
The General had a stack of papers. He took me through 30 minutes of questioning about my
background in architecture. Finally he said, "I think you'll do." Troops on the island were worn
out. He wanted a recreation centre for four to six hundred men at a time, three to five days each.
He showed me the site — a beautiful eight-acre plateau on the Burugo River, short grass,
surrounded by trees. Perfect.
"When can you start?" Tomorrow. "How many engineers will you give me?" None — he couldn't
spare any. He'd give me enough money to hire 250 natives and two interpreters. Materials? None
to spare. "I thought you said you were an architect. Find out what the natives build out of. Build it
out of that."
I went to the town of Burugo and asked for the best builders. Two brothers. They built with three
materials: nipa (a long grass woven into mats), bamboo, and the trunks of coconut palms.
I followed them for a week, watching them build a house. I developed tremendous admiration for
their skill — but also saw deficiencies. All their buildings leaned, because the grass ties expanded
in moisture and loosened in wind. I decided I didn't want a leaning recreation centre. The
solution: signal corps wire, which was lying all over the island. It wouldn't expand in moisture or
heat.
The river was perfect for swimming at high tide — a one-and-a-half-foot jump from the bank. At
low tide, a nine-foot drop to two feet of water. We needed a floating dock for 200 men. Coconut
palm wouldn't float — too dense. We built a cage out of bamboo, filled it with empty 55-gallon
drums, and it went up and down on poles with the tide.
Over three months, with 150 men collecting materials and 100 women weaving nipa, we built a
recreation centre with locker rooms, indoor facilities, showers for 400 men, baseball diamonds,
basketball courts — using only the natives' three materials plus wire and drums.
The main recreation hall was 40 by 60 feet. The natives screamed that I couldn't put a roof on it
— the longest bamboo was 12 to 14 feet. I brought out a template and built bamboo trusses to
span the 40 feet. They'd never seen that before.
When we finished, the natives went back to Burugo, tore it down, and rebuilt it using the
techniques they'd learned.
I came out of that experience feeling I was more developed than they were. Why? Not because I
had more than they did. I didn't have anything they didn't have. Development is not a matter of
how much you have — it's a matter of how much you can do with whatever you have.
The more you can do with what resources you've got, the more developed you are. The less
dependent you are on resources because of your ability to create them, the more developed you
are.
Standard of living is not a measure of development — it's a measure of growth. The appropriate
measure of development is quality of life.

The Paragon of Development
The paradigm of development is not the paradigm of growth. J.P. Morgan, Jean-Paul Getty, Sam
Walton may be paragons of growth, but none of development.
The paragon of development is Robinson Crusoe — the ultimate symbol of the developed man.
He built a hell of a good quality of life out of nothing. It's not a matter of how much you've got, but
how much you can do with whatever you have.
We've begun to appreciate that continued increases in standard of living are very frequently
accompanied by decreasing quality of life. That's what the ecology movement is all about —
people saying we have to be willing to sacrifice some standard of living for a higher quality of life.
To develop is to increase your ability and desire to satisfy your own needs and desires, and those
of others.



Q&A (Selected)
On metaphysics and the structure of the universe:
The term "metaphysics" was originally used by Aristotle. It literally means "after physics" — it
was a book he wrote after Physics. Philosophers have been trying to put additional significance
into it ever since. It has no more significance than "number two" did coming after number one.
What it's generally taken to mean is the study of the structure of the universe which cannot be
directly observed but inferred from what we observe.
On whether the universe is finite or infinite:
I don't feel any need to believe either that it's finite or infinite. It's irrelevant — it can't affect
anything I do. It was critical in the Machine Age, but it isn't now. If you want to believe in an
expanding universe, you can. I can't prove you're wrong. If you want to believe in a finite
universe, you can. I can't prove you're wrong either. It's a matter of emotional preference. We
don't have to pretend it's a scientific issue.
On survival and growth as means, not ends:
Survival and growth become means of development, just as profit became a means to survival
and growth. They're no longer objectives — they are means.
The only way a company can survive is to increase its productivity. The most effective way today
is through automation — but that reduces the number of people required. Employment is the
only method ever discovered by society of simultaneously producing and distributing wealth. If
you grow in a coordinated way with increases in productivity, you absorb people displaced by
technology into new businesses created through growth.
On B.F. Skinner:
Skinner's thinking never proceeded beyond about 1910. There are still people who believe in
Newton. Skinner is a mechanistic behaviourist. He represents two generations ago in
psychology. He happens to be a very smart man, but he's wrong.
On whether he's interested in the resurgence of fundamentalism:
I ought to be honest with you — I'm not interested in that question. I could fabricate an answer,
but that would be unfair to you. It's just one I don't think worth thinking about. That doesn't
mean it isn't worth others thinking about — that's just not where my concern is.
On the Apple Computer founder being fired:
You're asking me to explain a phenomenon of Apple Computer using cause and effect — but I
just rejected cause and effect. I can't blame it on either Steve or credit the success to Sculley.
They may have been necessary, but neither is sufficient. When you think synthetically, you don't
talk about blame and "what's the cause?" You look for the interactions which produce a given
state. Sculley at Pepsi-Cola was not the success he was at Apple. He didn't do it alone. Steve was
very successful at Apple up to a point, and then he failed. It's the interaction of various
conditions. You can't give a simple explanation of a systemic property.


Transcribed and edited from a lecture delivered by Russell L. Ackoff.
