EC 4000 — Lecture 1: Orientation
Richard Hamming



Course Logistics
Welcome to EC 4000. The class meets Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday — 3 o'clock on Friday. I'm
in Hispanic 518, extension 2655. I'm typically in mornings because I'm only teaching half-time,
so I go home and work in the afternoons.
There are some notes here, and for those not here — don't come asking. I can't give out sets of
notes by mail because the book is being published, and the publisher has a right to profit by it.
It'll be out within a year. Meanwhile, students in this class can get a set of notes, and if there
aren't enough at the end of the day, I'll bring some more tomorrow.



What This Course Is About
The first lecture is on orientation — what am I trying to do?
The purpose of this course is to prepare you for your technical future. There really is no technical
content in this course, although I'm going to talk about digital filters and all kinds of things —
things you presumably know. I am concerned about style.
I have studied great scientists ever since I was at Los Alamos during the war. What is it that
differentiates those who do and those who do not do significant things? Mainly it's a matter of
style. Many a person I've known worked just as hard as others but didn't have much to show for
it. So my problem is to instil in you something called style, so you will amount to something.
After all, the Navy is paying a large sum of money to have you here, and it wants money back by
your later performance.
I will examine, criticise, and talk about various people's style — mainly my own, but other
people's where I can use it. There are many things I'm going to tell you that I wish somebody had
told me. I had to find out for myself. This course is not a normal technical course. It's all about the
topics they never told you in class that they should have, because each course is taught in
isolation and a large amount falls in between. That's what I'm trying to pick up.



Style Cannot Be Put Into Words
Style cannot be put into words. I can only approach you by particular examples and let you infer
what it is.
There is a belief that you probably hold — that anything can be talked about. This goes back to
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle in early Greek times. They thought they could talk about the gods,
truth, beauty, justice, love — all those things. At the same time, there were the Mystery Cults in
Greece who said: you must experience — you cannot talk. And if you remember the Middle Ages,
various saints said you can't talk about God, you've got to experience Him. The same way the
Mohammedans about Allah — you can't portray Him, you can't put up pictures, you must sense.
So there has long been a school which says you cannot put everything into words, and one of
those things is style. I really cannot say what I mean. I can only give you these examples and
struggle, hoping that you will get the idea.



Why I Talk About Myself
To be effective in a course like this, I have found that I have to talk about myself. If I make
abstract remarks, it just sounds like so many pious words. If I talk about me — what I've done —
maybe it will penetrate.
This gives the course an attitude of bragging. I'm always talking about myself. But I will tell you
several mistakes that I made, too, so you won't do the same sort of thing.
Similarly, I have to get you to quit your modesty. I have to get you individually to respond to my
challenge — that you're going to be great. You have to say to yourself: "Yes, if that guy Hamming
can go out and become a great scientist, I can too. I can become a great person." I have to get you
to say to yourself that it is worth the effort, and you're going to try to be something more than just
the average person.



Coaches, Not Teachers
While we speak of teachers, we are really coaches. I cannot run the four-minute mile for you. I
can comment upon your style, but you must do the work. The same way — I cannot make you a
great scientist. I can criticise style and other things, but I cannot by mere words make you great.
Just as in running a four-minute mile, you must do the work.
Which means you have to take what you hear and read, think it over carefully, discuss it with
your friends, and see what you can adapt to yourself.
There is no one style which is successful. Painters paint in many different styles. You have to find
a style that is you, which means you have to take fragments from other people, use them, adapt
them, and make them yours. You can't copy me directly — you won't get away with it.
I will use the analogy of painting. In painting, once you've learned colour mixing, form, and
sketching, you study under a master whom you temporarily accept as knowing what he's talking
about. But there are limits to what can be done. You know that if you copy the master's style
exactly, you will not be a great painter. You also know that if you paint in the style he or she did,
it's too late — the future wants a different style.
Thus I can tell you about the style I used in the past, but that won't be the style you'll need to
cope with the future. You must manufacture the style which will make you a significant person in
the future. What I did would not make me successful if I were starting now, just as my
predecessors got successful on things that I couldn't do and get successful on.



The Difficulty Increases With Each Generation
When I went to Bell Laboratories in 1946, I looked around — since I was already interested in
what made great scientists — and I looked at what they did. When I looked at what they did to
become famous, it didn't look that difficult. They tended to do the easy problems. I found in the
course of my time there a couple of holes they left, but fundamentally they did these easy
problems. My generation did the somewhat harder ones, and we left to the others the harder still.
Every generation has more difficulty, but you stand on our shoulders to some extent. Yet the task
is harder. Having got man to the moon, the next real good feat in space is going to be a lot harder.



The Young Turks
When I came to the Labs, there were four of us who came in at about the same time, about the
same age — within a year. We privately called ourselves the "Four Young Turks," and many years
later I discovered top management called us the same.
We were troublemakers. We didn't do things the way the previous generation did. We did new
things. The previous generation didn't like it — we didn't do things "right."
For example, my boss Henrik Bode, in network theory, had made his reputation doing network
theory with complex variables. He knew that's how you do things — after all, that's what made
him famous. This guy Hamming comes along and keeps using computing machines, which is not
the way to do it in his eyes. But it was the thing that needed to be done.
This is a lesson I want to get across to you regularly. Supposing I am successful and you do rise to
the top — would you please remember that what made you great is not appropriate for the next
generation? You know how to get great, because after all you were great, but the things that you
did may not be appropriate. All too often we have that trouble with bosses. They know: "By God,
this is what I did, and I got to the top — it must be right." They're very often wrong. I want you to
think seriously, when you rise to the top, that your method of success may not be appropriate
now that the world has changed.



Education vs. Training
I want to talk about education. Education is what, when, and why to do things. Training is how to
do it. Most of your courses have been training. I'm trying to talk about the education part.
If you have one without the other, it's not much good. I've had very able technical people
reporting to me who applied their technology and methods to the wrong problem — and it had to
be undone. And I've had other people who had all kinds of theory but couldn't do anything.
They're not much use either. You need both: theory to guide you, and skill and technique to do.
One without the other isn't too good.
In a certain sense I'm engaged in meta-education — I'm talking about education constantly,
because that's what you're going to have to do. You're going to have to educate yourself
constantly. That's what the future demands.



The Exponential Growth of Knowledge
I'm going to try constantly to project forward what the world's going to be like, but let's look back
first to history.
The modern era in science and engineering began with Sir Isaac Newton — roughly 1642. He was
born Christmas Day, the same year that Galileo died, and he lived to be about 85. So we can say
it's around 1700.
From Newton's time to ours, we have roughly doubled the knowledge every 17 years. The
doubling period of science from then to now is roughly 17 years.
When I came to Bell Laboratories in '46, they were trying to shrink down from wartime size to
5,500 people. I watched through 30 years of management putting on hiring freezes and doing
everything else — but the doubling continued, every 17 years, with small wiggles. They had to
hire the people to keep up with the expanding knowledge.
It's a common statement that 90% of the scientists who ever lived are now alive.



A Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation
I'm going to turn now to a back-of-the-envelope calculation, which I learned by watching Fermi
and other people — Shockley and others. When I used to go to lunch with them, this is what they
did.
Suppose first we have exponential growth of the number of scientists — that comes from a
differential equation: the rate of change is proportional to how much you have, and the solution is
exponential growth.
If I assume the amount of knowledge being generated is proportional to the number of scientists,
I can integrate up to now versus up to 17 years ago. The ratio works out to say that half the
knowledge has been generated in the last 17 years — consistent with the doubling.
Now take the other statement: 90% of the scientists who ever lived are now alive. I take 55 years
as a reasonable scientific lifetime — you probably don't mean a living scientist when he's two
years old, you mean from when he's beginning to be a scientist until they decay somewhere in
the eighties. If I put that in, I come up with 89%, which is close enough to 90%.
You see what happened: I got a clearer idea of what I was talking about, and I had to answer a
question I hadn't thought about — what did I mean by the lifetime of a scientist? Those two
statements are compatible: we double every 17 years, and 90% of the scientists who ever lived are
now alive.
The reason I want to put in back-of-the-envelope calculations is that they're widely used. It puts
the thing firmer in your mind — having shown you the calculation, you may retain it longer. Plus
it gives you practice in quick modelling. Nobody pretends this is really accurate. I don't pretend
17 is the exact number — it's somewhere around there.
Back-of-the-envelope calculations are very useful. I found it very useful when I hear things over
TV or radio, or read newspapers — do a quick model and ask myself: are these numbers possible?
Very frequently, two things emerge: either they're not possible, or you didn't even know what
they were talking about. To make a model, you found that they failed to tell you what they were
talking about — they just gave you a spectacular answer.



The Consequences of Doubling
This doubling business is a very serious one. I've had to live through my life with that fact. Here's
a table:

 Multiplier                                                   Years

 2×                                                           ~17

 3×                                                           ~27

 4×                                                           ~34

 5×                                                           ~39

 10×                                                          ~56



One way to read it: ask the time from now to retirement, look at the column — that's how much
more knowledge there will be than what you now have, if we go on the same way. You face a
rather horrendous future.
Another way to look at it: suppose you were 34 when your child was born. Your child goes to
college — there's four times as much knowledge. Not just mathematical theorems — recordings
of Beethoven's Ninth, where to go skiing, what channels to listen to on TV. There's going to be
four times as much knowledge for your poor child to face. Don't be surprised if your children are
somewhat more disoriented than you were — and God knows you were sometimes disoriented.
Furthermore, almost half of the new material occurs in the last doubling period, which is what
causes saturation. Saturation comes on quite rapidly.
If you think you'll be Chief of Staff in, say, 39 years from now — there'll be five times as much
knowledge needed to run the Navy as is needed now. That is what you face.
Learning to Learn
What's my answer? Learning to learn was the only thing I could do. Things become obsolete —
something like half of what we have taught you lovingly in other courses will be obsolete in 15
years. Either we're no longer doing it, or it's been replaced by something else.
Consider what I had to live through. I came to Bell Laboratories in '46 and they were running
vacuum tubes. So I started — having a mathematical background — studying what vacuum
tubes were. But in some years I began eating with the physics department, and I ate with the
guys while they were developing the engineering side of transistors. I did a great deal of
calculation for them. I obsoleted all the knowledge I had learned. I haven't seen a vacuum tube
for a long while, except in my friend's office where he keeps one to show students what a vacuum
tube is.
You can say, well, the original transistors were a tin can with three legs. Yeah — now there's a
million transistors on a chip that size.
At Los Alamos, we calculated atomic bomb designs on relay calculators which probably averaged
maybe an operation a second — around the clock, six and a half days a week, for a month,
sometimes three months, to get one solution. Now you can punch it into a modern machine —
boop — and there's the answer.
I was educated as a mathematician. I certainly had no course in numerical analysis. I never knew
about a computer. I knew a little physics — Los Alamos taught me some more. But
fundamentally, when I went to Bell Labs, because I believed that in the computing I did I should
understand the nature of the problem, I had to learn something of the physical sciences — some
chemistry as well as a lot of physics — some social science, and a little bit of biological science,
because the Laboratories had such departments. I spent a lifetime getting background
knowledge.
One thing you can do is try to cling to fundamentals — which is very glib until you ask: what do I
mean by fundamentals? I have two criteria, which are not fully adequate. One: from the
fundamentals, you can derive the rest of the field. Two: they've been around for some time. But
"the fundamentals of amplification were vacuum tubes" doesn't count. True, the Nyquist
formulas are still good, and the gain formulas used with vacuum tubes are still useful — although
we have to apply them to other things. Feedback is still the same. But a lot of things are not.



Science vs. Engineering
In science, if you know what you're doing, you shouldn't be doing it — because science is
supposed to be exploration of what you don't know. In engineering, you should know what
you're doing.
Well, nothing is pure. Science involves a great deal of engineering, and engineering involves a
great deal of new material. It's a great blend. But what is painful to you — and it's going to get
worse — is that the two fields are growing together.
When I first came to Bell Labs, when something was discovered in physics, the telephone
company was not in that great a hurry to get it developed and into the field. After all, they had
pretty much a monopoly — why hurry? Now, we are not willing to wait for scientific principles to
be developed first and then applied. We want it in the field tomorrow.
The leisure which we used long ago — develop the ideas first and then apply them — is going to
be less and less acceptable. When an idea is first around, you want to apply it.
I just read last night that one of the presidents, who was at a museum — one of these World's
Fairs — was shot, and the bullet was in his back. The doctors refused to operate because they
didn't know where the bullet was. But right there at the Fair, X-rays were being demonstrated.
They didn't use the new technique — it was right there, ready and available. They wouldn't use it,
and he died. No, they were conservative. We don't allow that much anymore. You're going to be
pushed very hard to go from idea to developed item and get it on the market rapidly.



Predicting the Future
I once read there were some 76 different methods of predicting the future. One is to predict
tomorrow will be like today — whatever the temperature is today, predict tomorrow is the same.
It's a pretty good prediction. A somewhat better one is to note the linear trend and predict it
forward — that's good for a while, but not too long. And furthermore, it depends on which
variable you pick to be linear. If you pick the coefficient in front, it's one thing. If you pick the
exponent, it's something else.
I made many predictions on how much computing we'd need — I was regularly wrong on the low
side. One time I got annoyed and said, "I will predict high." So I got out some formulas and
predicted really high. A couple of years later, the piece of paper turned up on my desk. I looked at
it — I was low again. The growth of computing has been unbelievable.
On the other hand, take artificial intelligence. The predictions made by almost all the experts 10,
20, 30 years ago have not been realised.
Nevertheless, there's a saying: short-term predictions are optimistic, long-term predictions are
pessimistic. The reason is simple — the long-term predictions are pessimistic because nobody
can believe a geometric progression. When we got transistors going, nobody in his right mind
would have predicted a million transistors on a chip that big. Nobody. It's beyond belief — but
that's what we did, and you know it.
Predicting the future is a very hard business, but you have to do it.



On History
Some people believe history repeats itself, and some believe exactly the opposite. But one thing
you can be sure of: what we now regard as the past was to some people the future, and what you
think is the future will become the past. There will be a time when some of you will be in the
history books.
Another thing against history is Henry Ford Senior's remark: "History is bunk." I think he said it
for two reasons.
First, history is rarely reported correctly. There are a great many descriptions of what happened
at Los Alamos during the war — no two of them agree, and they don't agree with what I think
happened. One time, Stanisław Ulam wrote his experience and published it. I came into Los
Alamos on my regular summer visit and said to my friend, "I just read Ulam's book — that isn't
how I remembered it." He said, "That isn't how I remembered it either. I was just going to ask how
you remembered it." And I suddenly realised: no two people remember the same thing. You're
familiar with this — an accident, several witnesses, they report different things. There is no
reliable report of what happened in the past. It's what has come down to us and been accepted.
Second, I think in Ford's mind was the fact that the past is being more rapidly disconnected from
the future. The invention of the computer tells you how much the world is different from what it
was before computers appeared.
Some historians, when you read them, will give you the impression that it was inevitable — it was
inevitable that Rome would fall, or this or that. On the other hand, they will tell you the future is
very open-ended, many things are possible. Can this be true — that the past was very
determined but the future is very open? It seems unlikely. So you're left with saying maybe the
past was not so determinate.
Consider the individual lives of Alexander the Great, Napoleon, and Hitler. If they had died in
their childhood, would not the world be very different? On the intellectual side — Pythagoras,
Aristotle, Newton, Maxwell, Einstein — people who, had they died in their youth, would have left
the world rather different.
Individuals do matter. I suggest that the past was less determinant than historians like to make it,
and the future is less open-ended than you would like to believe. But there are great possibilities
for you.



Technology and Society
One other thing against history: unforeseen technological inventions can ruin anything.
Transistors — the development of vacuum tubes was practically cut off. A technological
invention can completely change the history of something, and one can hardly foresee
technological inventions.
But there are also social inventions, which are important. You people have been trained mainly in
the physical side, and I've got to make you more sensitive to the fact that all of your life takes
place in a social society which has restraints. I will claim that the future of technology will be less
determined by what technology can do than by social, legal, and other restraints on what we may
do.
If you think about computer-controlled highway traffic — it sounds good to you. Then ask
yourself: who do I sue in an accident? And you begin to realise it's going to be very difficult to get
going. Social conventions are going to stop a great many things from happening.



The Drunken Sailor
I want to tell a story I'll use several times — the story of the drunken sailor. He staggers a couple
steps this way, staggers that way, staggers this way. In n steps, typically he'll get the square root of
n distance away. In 100 steps, he'll be about 10 away. In 10,000 steps, about 100. He may be right
where he started; he may be further away. But that's typical.
On the other hand, if there's a pretty girl over there — he staggers like this, back like this, over
like this — he's going to get a distance proportional to n.
If I can create in you a vision of where you are headed, you will make progress proportional to n.
If you do not have a vision, you will wander like a drunken sailor and get very little.
One of my major purposes is to get you to form a reasonable vision of what you are going to do
with your future — what kind of person you're going to be. You're going to say to me, "Hamming,
how do I know the future?" And I'm going to say: it doesn't matter much. From what I've
examined in life, it doesn't matter much what goal you set — whether you march that way, that
way, or that way. If you have a goal, you'll get somewhere near it. If you don't have a goal, you're a
drunken sailor.
My problem is to make you form your goals and to some extent try to achieve them — to make
you something important rather than just drifting. It's comfortable to drift through life, and a
great many people will assert they're perfectly content to drift. I don't think that's too good an
idea.
It's none of my business what goal you take. It is my business to force you to set up some
reasonably decent goals, to try and achieve something in your life. The society is paying a great
deal of money for your education — it's entitled to something.
Those who do something generally have some kind of goals and see where they're headed, and
their lives add up. Those who don't are just a bunch of isolated events — they did this, they did
that, they did the other thing, but nothing added up.
Even if you want merely to be a great guitar player, I don't mind — so long as you set a goal that
involves struggling. That is the essential part.



The Unity of Knowledge
The standard method of teaching is to have departments, which break things up into subject
matter — calculus, linear programming, and so on. Too much falls between, and this course is an
attempt to plug those holes.
Another goal I have is to show you that, in spite of different departments, there's an essential
unity of all knowledge. When you face a difficult problem of unknown type — it doesn't matter
whether it comes from chemistry, physics, or anything else — you have to find the answer. And
knowledge is pretty homogeneous then. It's no longer divided up into courses, no longer divided
up into departments.
At Bell Labs, I was in the math department almost all the time, but in fact I was doing a great
many other things — statistics, computing, physics, chemistry. We did not observe too tight a
division. For purposes of organisation, you do have to have some structure. But I want to get into
your minds that knowledge is a sort of homogeneous body which we have specialised with
certain names, but it's all interconnected.



Why Computing Will Dominate
The course will centre around computing — not, I like to think, because I'm prejudiced and my
life was in computing, but rather because computers are going to dominate science and
engineering. There are very powerful reasons for this.
Economics. Computers are far, far cheaper than human beings — and they're getting cheaper by
the year. Humans are getting more expensive by the year.
Speed. Your nervous system — if you drop something on your toe, the signal goes up to your
head at about 100 metres per second. Light: 300,000 kilometres per second. You aren't in the
league. You can't even touch electronic speeds.
Accuracy. Machines can be quite precise. They can do double precision if necessary. You would
have trouble doing double-precision arithmetic.
Reliability. God — or nature, however you want to put it — didn't make you to be a reliable thing.
You've been walking for years, and still every now and then you trip and stumble. You can't do
anything really reliable. That's why man ended up on top of the heap — he has flexibility built in.
But don't ever try to get humans to do something reliable. Take bowling: all you have to do is
throw the ball down the alley exactly the same way every time for a perfect game. Perfect games
are rare, even among the most skilled experts.
Rapidity of control. Because machines have rapid control, we are now building aeroplanes
which are basically unstable, and we have a computer correcting the instability every
millisecond, so we get better performance. The pilot couldn't do it. If that computer goes out, the
pilot's through. The pilot is left with the large-scale, broad planning — but the millisecond-to-
millisecond is under computer control.
Freedom from boredom. It sounds trivial. You cannot put a human being on a job to watch for
something for three years and, when it happens, respond promptly. You can put a computer on
that job. If such-and-such happens in the atomic pile, do this. Well, it hasn't happened for four
years — the dial goes over — the human being isn't going to respond well. He's been staring at
the thing for the last two and a half years. Machines don't know what the word "boredom" means.
Bandwidth. In any rapidly changing situation, the person in charge can only get so much
information in and out. There's a general belief that you can process only about 50 bits per
second, maybe 60. A machine's got enormous bandwidth. Put all your inputs together — visual,
auditory, everything — and they won't match a modern machine. Not only coming in, but giving
orders out. For central control, the human simply cannot compete in a complicated situation if
it's merely bandwidth in and bandwidth out. If it's making judgements, that's another story. But
we no longer have a crew aiming a gun at an aeroplane — we have self-contained systems. The
human is too slow.
Ease of retraining. Training, to a great extent, is: you learn to do something, and now we change
the equipment — you've got to unlearn the old habits and learn new ones, repeating them many
times. With the computer, I change the program and it's done. No elaborate training, no endless
hours of constant practice. Just put a new program in and the machine behaves a new way.
Hostile environments. Outer space, underwater, high radiation fields, warfare, unhealthy
manufacturing situations — I can put machines in those situations where humans are very
difficult. In space, I've got to keep this human being in an atmosphere he's used to — oxygen and
so on. High radiation will kill them. How we're going to manage getting people to Mars and back
in the radiation coming from the Sun — I don't know whether we just irradiate them thoroughly,
or maybe decide not to send human beings that far.
Personal problems. This is one I'm much sensitive to. Personal problems dominate
management. With machines, there are no pensions, no personal squabbles — two machines
don't get squabbling with each other, but I've had two employees who wouldn't even share the
same room. No unions, no personal leave, no egos, no death of relatives. No recreation needed —
if I turn the machine off, that's the end of it. With a human being, I have to provide reasonable
recreation.
Machines have got it all over humans in these areas. All of you have probably already been
saying, "Oh yeah, but what about the advantages humans have?" I won't have to list those —
you're trying to do it already. But I gave you a bunch of details which you'll find very hard to get
around.
Because it's economically sound, you are going to see more and more machines running
organisations. The design of chips is under computer control to a great extent. Some computers
are actually being assembled heavily by machines. I was on the board of directors of a computer
company for a while, and at one point more than half the computers coming down the
production line, we were grabbing to mechanise the production line itself. We sold less than half
— because we were mechanising the line and getting production much cheaper. That shows you
how rapidly a company in the computing business was mechanising itself.
One of my friends said he ordered a bunch of machines. The message came in overnight. A
bunch of machines assembled those particular computers — just what they wanted, with the
parts they wanted — and the next day those computers were on the loading dock.



A Religious Course
Lastly, this is in a certain sense a religious course. I am preaching a message: that with one life to
lead, you ought to do more than just get by.
It is an emotional matter I'm appealing to. It's very frequently said that a happy life is one in
which you have some goals and achieve them. But studying the matter over, reading about it, and
talking to people — everybody pretty much agrees that it's not the achievement of the goal that
is the best part. It's the struggle. The struggle to success is what makes you what you will be.
Remember: in your old age, you're going to have to live with yourself. There's no escaping living
with yourself in old age. You're stuck with yourself, and in old age you can't change much, as you
can when you're younger. Consider the kind of person you wish to be in your old age, and start
now being that kind of person.
It is an opinion — not a fact — that most people believe the struggle to achieve excellence is
worth it. When you look at people's lives...
As a child, I went to a movie — they were called Nickelodeons in my day, but we actually spent a
dime to go. One Saturday, I went with a friend of mine and it was one of those films — you
laughed and laughed and laughed at all the ridiculous situations. We walked out and he said to
me, "You know, that wasn't a very funny movie." I thought for a while, and I said, "You're right."
All the laughter did not make the movie funny at all.
And the same way with life. The pleasant life is not the one that is the sum total of pleasant
moments. Somehow or other, it adds up very differently. The good life is not the life of pleasure
from moment to moment — and you know it. In fact, you are well aware that you cannot get up in
the morning and say, "I shall be happy today," and make it work. The good life has to be snuck up
upon.
I'm saying — as an opinion of myself and many other books — that the way to do that is to take
yourself in hand and manage yourself to be the person you wish to be, to achieve the goals you
wish, and be more articulate about your direction than just idle drifting like a drunken sailor.



The Unexamined Life
In ancient Greece, our boy Socrates said: "The unexamined life is not worth living."
I was crossing the Cornell campus one time, as consultant for the president — a whole committee
had been put together. Walking across, I heard a professor right ahead of me saying to a student:
"The unexamined life is not worth living." And in the course of crossing one quadrangle, he
managed to say it three times.
So I'll repeat it a third time: the unexamined life is not worth living.
See you Thursday. There are notes here on the course — and if there aren't enough, I'll bring
some more tomorrow.
